
# [ICML 2026] Grounding Functional Similarity by Invariance-Aware Model Stitching

**Authors**: [Ioannis Athanasiadis](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=RCAtJgUAAAAJ), [Anmar Karmush](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=alaN6Z8AAAAJ), [Michael Felsberg](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=lkWfR08AAAAJ)


## Abstract

In deep learning, functional similarity evaluation quantifies the extent to which independently trained models learn similar input–output relationships. In model stitching, functional similarity is framed as representation forward compatibility, i.e., whether the representations of two models can be aligned to solve a given task. Recent studies, however, highlight a critical limitation: models relying on different information cues can still produce compatible representations, making them appear misleadingly similar \cite{smithfunctional}. We attribute this failure to standard model stitching being inherently blind to the invariance properties of the stitched models. To address this limitation, we introduce the forward-backward compatibility requirement under which we formulate the invariance-aware model stitching. Through analyzing key stitching configurations, we study the interplay between forward and backward compatibility, showing that invariance-aware model stitching provides a more principled approach to functional similarity evaluation while revealing functional discrepancies previously obscured.


**TL;DR:** Invariance-aware model stitching makes for a more meaningful notion of functional similarity compared to standard model stitching.

[📄 View Paper on OpenReview](https://openreview.net/forum?id=yUEFOa32CG) 


## Installation

To set up the Conda environment required to run the experiments:

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yaml
conda activate iris_stitching
```

## Setting Up the Datasets

We conducted experiments on [CIFAR-10](https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar-10-python.tar.gz) and [ImageNet](https://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/2012/) datasets. 

To generate the LS-ImageNet-10:

```bash
python ./data/generate_ls_imagenet.py
```

## Set Up 

### Setting up the configuration files
The configuration files used in the paper can be found at [this link](https://liuonline-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/ioaat57_liu_se/IgDyHQtSBmXVR7CoUwPyQOc-AQjP0mq5Btsq6dpaDPy2itg?e=Wfe6wm).

Modify the ./config/define_configs.yaml file based on your personal setup and apply these modifications:

```bash
python ./config/set_configs.py
```
Then, the modified configurations files can be found under the config_resolved directory. Note that the configurations files are divided into different folders corresponding the different experimental setups (i.e., information, shortcut and adversarial stitching)

### Setting up the base models (i.e., the models to be stitched). 

For example, to train a base ResNet-18 model on CIFAR-10 you can run the command below:

```bash
python train_base.py --config "./configs_resolved/baselines/low_resolution/resnet18/0/clean/cifar10.yaml"
```

You can also use the weights, as trained by us, at [this link](https://liuonline-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/ioaat57_liu_se/IgDyHQtSBmXVR7CoUwPyQOc-AQjP0mq5Btsq6dpaDPy2itg?e=Wfe6wm). Due to space limitation we provide only the weights  for two different seeds.

### Setting up the IRIs (Nanda et al.) data

For example, to inverse CIFAR-10 wrt. the first layer of a model trained on CIFAR-10 data you can run the command below:

```bash
python generate_iris.py --config "./configs_resolved/pre_inversion/low_resolution/information_stitching/resnet18/cifar_cifar_0/1/cifar_iris/IRIS_1.yaml"
```

You can also use the inversed datasets, as generated by us, at [this link](https://liuonline-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/ioaat57_liu_se/IgDyHQtSBmXVR7CoUwPyQOc-AQjP0mq5Btsq6dpaDPy2itg?e=Wfe6wm). Due to space limitation we provide only the inversed data for the experiments on low resolution data for two seeds. 

## Model Stitching

### Performing model stitching
Regular model stitching (with FuLA stitching objective) between two models trained on CIFAR-10 trained using different seeds:

```bash
python train_stithching.py --config "./configs_resolved/information_stitching/low_resolution/resnet18/cifar_cifar_0/1/cifar/FuLA.yaml
```

Invariance-aware model stitching (with FuLA stitching objective) between two models trained on CIFAR-10 trained using different seeds:

```bash
python train_stithching.py --config "./configs_resolved/information_stitching/low_resolution/resnet18/cifar_cifar_0/1/cifar_iris/FuLA.yaml
```

The command above would generate a result.yaml file containing the functional similarity across corresponding layers of these models.


### Visualizing the stitching plots

You can visualize the stitching plots using the scripts found under the construct_plots directory. For example to generate the stitching plots corresponding to information stitching run:

```bash
python ./construct_plots/information_stitching.py
```

Make sure to update the script accordingly to have the paths linking to results.yaml files. 

Disclaimer: Due to the large size of the models and their corresponding inverted dataset, we are not able to host all the weights and inverted data used in our paper but only their corresponding configuration files. We are open to sharing additional weights and inverted datasets upon request.  

